---
subtitle: 'Author 1, Author 2, … , Corresponding Author'
title: |
    Patient Engagement in Clinical Data Research Networks: The 2015 Greater
    Plains Collaborative Health and Medical Research Family Survey
---

Target journals:
================

JAMIA (pretty high bar & impact, but it has already published a lot on
PCORnet & CDRNs (see bibliography). I believe they would be positive
about describing governance, multi-center data sharing, redcap, etc. I
believe they would also be much less critical about the extremely low
response rate. & so we therefore can do less with the data/results
itself.)

Other Journals???

Objective
=========

Describe patient engagement findings and experiences of Healthy Weight
Cohort GPC member sites

Structured Abstract
===================

Placeholder for abstract text. \[Larry\]

Background: In 2013, the Patient Centered Outcomes Research Institute
(PCORI) funded 11 Clinical Data Research Networks (CDRNs) to form the
backbone of PCORnet, the National Patient Centered Clinical Research
Network. Based on electronic health records (EHRs), each CDRN committed
to building large patient cohorts with electronic clinical data governed
by policies and procedures to conduct multi-site clinical effectiveness
research. The Greater Plains Collaborative (GPC) CDRN consists of 11
academic medical centers in 8 Midwestern states.

Objective: PCORI Phase 1 funding directed CDRNs to demonstrate the
feasibility of patient contact and engagement using the EHRs data
infrastructure. We describe the GPC feasibility study to engage patients
on health and medical research.

Methods: governance, extracts, survey, analysis methods,

Results: Governance & process findings? Summarize tabular results.

Conclusions: Comments on results. CDRNs are a rapid and effective method
to assemble large patient cohorts and conduct multisite, patient
centered studies of clinical comparative effectiveness research.

Introduction
============

PCORI, CDRNs, PCORI CDRN Obesity Objectives/ requirements
---------------------------------------------------------

In 2015, The Greater Plains Collaborative was established as Clinical
Data Research Network (CDRN), funded by the Patient-Centered Outcomes
Research Institute (PCORI) to securely collect and organize patient
health information obtained during routine care in its member health
systems {about PCORnet}. To date, 13 such CDRNS have been funded,
creating a national “network of networks”. These networks are organized
by a coordinating center and overseen by the National Patient-Centered
Clinical Research Network (PCORnet).

The purpose of CDRNs and PCORnet is to support efficient clinical
research by creating centralized access to the de-identified data of
millions of patients across the country. Each CDRN is responsible for
harmonizing patient data across its member systems, and for creating
streamlined governance and procedures to facilitate researcher access.
Importantly, CDRNs actively involve a variety of stakeholders, including
patients, clinicians, healthcare system leaders, and others to build and
oversee CDRN activities

To test each CDRN’s ability to identify and recruit patients with a
particular condition, and to test the ability to harmonize data elements
within a network, each CDRN was required to create three cohorts: one of
a common disease, one of a rare disease and one concerning height and
weight.

GPC & member sites, populations served
--------------------------------------

Placeholder text, map graphic?

In Phase I of funding, the Greater Plains Collaborative (GPC) was
comprised of ten member health systems, with the data of roughly 6
million people across 7 states, north and south across the Great Plains
region. Member institutions included University of Kansas Medical
Center, Children’s Mercy Hospital (Kansas City, MO), University of Iowa
Healthcare, University of Wisconsin - Madison, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Marshfield Clinic, University of Minnesota, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, University of Texas Health Science Center at
San Antonio, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center.

Covering more than 1300 miles, the broad reach of the GPC network
encompasses large swaths of rural populations as well as multiple urban
centers. Four systems in the GPC have established significant
relationships with Native American populations. Two health systems
located in Texas serve heavily Spanish-speaking populations, which had a
significant effect on the healthy weight study approach and methods. Of
the ten member health systems, all provide comprehensive adult and
pediatric care, with the exception of Children’s Mercy Kansas City,
which exclusively serves children.

In Phase II, largely following the work described in this paper, two
additional members were added – University of Missouri and Indiana
University.

Methods
=======

Healthy weight cohort team, organization of meetings, etc.
----------------------------------------------------------

The healthy weight cohort team began regular meetings in January of
2014. Based on discussion and collective interest, the group quickly
decided to develop its cohort and survey around a pediatric population.
Weekly working group calls established an interest in characterizing the
cohort around data elements that would be attainable for the nascent GPC
network, and creating a survey that could be used as a building block
for future GPC and healthy weight cohort work. Thus, the Health and
Medical Research Family Survey focused on respondents’ willingness to
take part in research.

IRB study protocol & aims, IRB deferral process
-----------------------------------------------

The overall purpose of the Greater Plains Collaborative (GPC) Healthy
Weight Study (HWS) was to conduct a demonstration survey across the 12
participating GPC sites focused on the topic of pediatric obesity. More
specifically, the aims were to: 1) estimate the willingness of
individuals to be contacted about research activities; 2) obtain
information on the attitudes of parents and adults of child bearing age
about research, including participation of their child/ren; 3) gain
insight into participant attitudes about the use of gathered data for
both local and national research; 4) explore the impact of various
demographic factors, survey methods, regional variation, and weight
status on the above questions. An additional expected outcome of the
project was to establish and explore the various practicalities and
functionalities of a large semi-interconnected system such as the GPC
for conducting collaborative research focused on pediatric obesity.

Although previous studies have been published on adult obesity using a
PCORI funded CDRN (Young et al, 2016), these studies were retrospective
in nature reporting on the number of patients in the network who met
certain criteria. In contrast, the GPC HWS not only gathered
retrospective data on individuals who met certain specific inclusion
criteria but also contacted a random group of individuals from this
sub-sample at each site with a survey invitation. The goal for of the 12
participating sites was to collect 1000 responses to “Survey 1” and 100
responses to “Survey 2.” Survey 1 was a single question asking whether
or not the individual contact was willing to be contacted for research,
and survey 2 was a more detailed assessment (see Table 1).

Across the GPC a central IRB process was developed (asked Russ for
reference on this – not in his paper). This involved a legal agreement
between all sites designating the University of Kansas Medical Center as
the lead IRB for the GPC, with all other sites agreeing to “rely” on
this central IRB. For the healthy weight study this central IRB process
was utilized. However, the University of Texas Health Science Center at
San Antonio (UTHSCSA) served as the central IRB site for the healthy
weight study across the GPC network. A team of investigators and staff
developed the necessary IRB documents which were submitted to the IRB at
UTHSCSA. Once the documents were reviewed and approved by this single
IRB, the documents were shared with all other participating site’s IRBs,
and these documents were approved without additional edits under the
existing overall IRB reliance agreement.

Natural experiment – variation in patient contacting methods
------------------------------------------------------------

Individuals who were sent the survey invitation were contacted via a
variety of means, including snail mail, email, and through the patient
portal systems in the site’s electronic medical record (EMR). The method
of contact was selected by the site as that which would encounter the
fewest barriers and result in the greatest sample. Allowing each site to
select their own contact method allowed for a naturalistic experiment of
response rates and other factors by method of contact. For a detailed
list of site and contact method see Table 2.

IT mechanics, Patient selection & contact, I2B2
-----------------------------------------------

This study combined electronic chart review with the results of a survey
administered to patients, or in the case of minors, to the patients’
guardians. For the electronic chart review, data was extracted from an
open source data warehouse platform called Integrating Informatics from
Bench to Bedside (i2b2) \[@murphy\_instrumenting\_2009\]. Each of the
participating sites had an i2b2 instance deployed, where they stored a
de-identified version of all structured data from their respective EMR
systems. As a result, no site had to transmit any identifying
information to any other site. Though not all the sites used the same
type of EMR system, because of i2b2’s very flexible star-schema design
the task of combining data from disparate sources was made more
tractable. The patient surveys were administered via REDCap
\[@reference\_forthcoming\]. The survey data and the EMR data extracted
from i2b2 could be merged together because each record is keyed to the
same non-informative index accross the two data sources.

Cohort selection was also done using i2b2, using the selection criteria
shown in Table 3.

There was one supplementary request sent out for the study sites to
acquire from their EMRs information about race, ethnicity, and class of
insurance provider (private, Medicaid, employer, government, self-pay,
etc.). Together with these data elements, information about income was
requested. Since not all health systems record patient income, we had to
rely on median household income for the census block group in which each
patient’s address was located, as obtained from the 2013 American
Community Survey \[@reference\_forthcoming\].

EHRs data extract, Patient reported outcome measures/Redcap Survey Data & Data Entry
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Data was extracted from the EMR using DatBuilder
\[@reference\_forthcoming\] collated into an analyzable tabular form
using DataFinisher \[@bokov\_denormalize\_2016\].

Analysis Plan
-------------

Placeholder text. \[Larry with assistance from Alex\]

Results
=======

Tables 1…N, Figures 1…N – describe findings \[Larry-to write describe,
Alex to produce table outputs\]

Discussion
==========

conclusions, strengths, limitations, future studies \[Larry – would like
assistance from everyone….\]

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit, sed do eiusmod
tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua. Ut enim ad minim
veniam, quis nostrud exercitation ullamco laboris nisi ut aliquip ex ea
commodo consequat. Duis aute irure dolor in reprehenderit in voluptate
velit esse cillum dolore eu fugiat nulla pariatur. Excepteur sint
occaecat cupidatat non proident, sunt in culpa qui officia deserunt
mollit anim id est laborum

Bibliography
============

Several potential additional references are here:

https://academic.oup.com/jamia/search-results?page=1&q=PCORI&SearchSourceType=1

\[1\]

R. L. Fleurence, L. H. Curtis, R. M. Califf, R. Platt, J. V. Selby, and
J. S. Brown, “Launching PCORnet, a national patient-centered clinical
research network,” *J Am Med Inform Assoc*, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 578–582,
Jul. 2014 \[Online\]. Available:
https://academic.oup.com/jamia/article/21/4/578/2909226/Launching-PCORnet-a-national-patient-centered.
\[Accessed: 12-Apr-2017\]

L. R. Waitman, L. S. Aaronson, P. M. Nadkarni, D. W. Connolly, and J. R.
Campbell, “The Greater Plains Collaborative: a PCORnet Clinical Research
Data Network,” J Am Med Inform Assoc, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 637–641, Jul.
2014 \[Online\]. Available:
https://academic.oup.com/jamia/article/21/4/637/2909307/The-Greater-Plains-Collaborative-a-PCORnet.
\[Accessed: 12-Apr-2017\]

Graphics - Tables, Figures
==========================

Table or figure caption.

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit, sed do eiusmod
tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua.

Table 1. Survey 1 and survey 2

Table 2. List of each site with their method of contacting survey
participants.

Table X. format

Tables 2,3,4 – formats - weighted and unweighted modeling
